Hindi cinema, popularly known as Bollywood and formerly as Bombay cinema, refers to the film industry based in Mumbai, engaged in production of motion pictures in Hindi language. The popular term Bollywood is a portmanteau of Bombay former name of Mumbai and Hollywood. The industry is a part of the larger Indian cinema, which also includes South Indian cinema and other smaller film industries. The term Bollywood, often mistakenly used to refer to Indian cinema as a whole, only refers to Hindilanguage films, with Indian cinema being an umbrella term that includes all the film industries in the country, each offering films in diverse languages and styles.
In 2017, Indian cinema produced 1,986 feature films, of which the largest number, 364 have been in Hindi. In 2022, Hindi cinema represented 33 of box office revenue, followed by Telugu and Tamil representing 20 and 16 respectively. Hindi cinema is one of the largest centres for film production in the world. Hindi films sold an estimated 341 million tickets in India in 2019. Earlier Hindi films tended to use vernacular Hindustani, mutually intelligible by speakers of either Hindi or Urdu, while modern Hindi productions increasingly incorporate elements of Hinglish.
The most popular commercial genre in Hindi cinema since the 1970s has been the masala film, which freely mixes different genres including action, comedy, romance, drama and melodrama along with musical numbers. Masala films generally fall under the musical film genre, of which Indian cinema has been the largest producer since the 1960s when it exceeded the American film industrys total musical output after musical films declined in the West. The first Indian talkie, Alam Ara 1931, was produced in the Hindustani language, four years after Hollywoods first sound film, The Jazz Singer 1927.
Alongside commercial masala films, a distinctive genre of art films known as parallel cinema has also existed, presenting realistic content and avoidance of musical numbers. In more recent years, the distinction between commercial masala and parallel cinema has been gradually blurring, with an increasing number of mainstream films adopting the conventions which were once strictly associated with parallel cinema.

Etymology
Bollywood is a portmanteau derived from Bombay the former name of Mumbai and Hollywood, a shorthand reference for the American film industry which is based in Hollywood, California.
The term Tollywood, for the Tollygungebased cinema of West Bengal, predated Bollywood. It was used in a 1932 American Cinematographer article by Wilford E. Deming, an American engineer who helped produce the first Indian sound picture.
Bollywood was probably invented in Bombaybased film trade journals in the 1960s or 1970s, though the exact inventor varies by account. Film journalist Bevinda Collaco claims she coined the term for the title of her column in Screen magazine. Her column entitled On the Bollywood Beat covered studio news and celebrity gossip. Other sources state that lyricist, filmmaker and scholar Amit Khanna was its creator. It is unknown if it was derived from Hollywood through Tollywood, or was inspired directly by Hollywood.
The term has been criticised by some film journalists and critics, who believe it implies that the industry is a poor cousin of Hollywood.

History
Early history 1890s1930s
In 1897, a film presentation by Professor Stevenson featured a stage show at Calcuttas Star Theatre. With Stevensons encouragement and camera, Hiralal Sen, an Indian photographer, made a film of scenes from that show, The Flower of Persia 1898. The Wrestlers 1899 by H. S. Bhatavdekar showed a wrestling match at the Hanging Gardens in Bombay.

Dadasaheb Phalkes silent film Raja Harishchandra 1913 is the first featurelength film made in India. The film, being silent, had English, Marathi, and Hindilanguage intertitles. By the 1930s, the Indian film industry as a whole was producing over 200 films per year. The first Indian sound film, Ardeshir Iranis Alam Ara 1931, made in Hindustani language, was commercially successful. With a great demand for talkies and musicals, Hindustani cinema as Hindi cinema was then known as and the other language film industries quickly switched to sound films.

Challenges and market expansion 1930s1940s
The 1930s and 1940s were tumultuous times India was buffeted by the Great Depression, World War II, the Indian independence movement, and the violence of the Partition. Although most early Bombay films were unabashedly escapist, a number of filmmakers tackled tough social issues or used the struggle for Indian independence as a backdrop for their films. Irani made the first Hindi colour film, Kisan Kanya, in 1937. The following year, he made a colour version of Mother India. However, colour did not become a popular feature until the late 1950s. At this time, lavish romantic musicals and melodramas were cinematic staples.

The decade of the 1940s saw an expansion of Bombay cinemas commercial market and its presence in the national consciousness. The year 1943 saw the arrival of Indian cinemas first blockbuster offering, the movie Kismet, which grossed in excess of the important barrier of one crore 10 million rupees, made on a budget of only two lakh 200,000 rupees. The film tackled contemporary issues, especially those arising from the Indian Independence movement, and went on to become the longest running hit of Indian cinema, a title it held till the 1970s. Film personalities like Bimal Roy, Sahir Ludhianvi and Prithviraj Kapoor participated in the creation of a national movement against colonial rule in India, while simultaneously leveraging the popular political movement to increase their own visibility and popularity. Themes from the Independence Movement deeply influenced Bombay film directors, screenplay writers, and lyricists, who saw their films in the context of social reform and the problems of the common people.
Before the Partition, the Bombay film industry was closely linked to the Lahore film industry known as Lollywood now part of the Pakistani film industry both produced films in Hindustani also known as HindiUrdu, the lingua franca of northern and central India. Another centre of Hindustanilanguage film production was the Bengal film industry in Calcutta, Bengal Presidency now Kolkata, West Bengal, which produced Hindustanilanguage films and local Bengali language films. Many actors, filmmakers and musicians from the Lahore industry migrated to the Bombay industry during the 1940s, including actors K. L. Saigal, Prithviraj Kapoor, Dilip Kumar and Dev Anand as well as playback singers Mohammed Rafi, Noorjahan and Shamshad Begum. Around the same time, filmmakers and actors from the Calcutta film industry began migrating to Bombay as a result, Bombay became the center of Hindustanilanguage film production.
The 1947 partition of India divided the country into the Republic of India and Pakistan, which precipitated the migration of filmmaking talent from film production centres like Lahore and Calcutta, which bore the brunt of the partition violence. This included actors, filmmakers and musicians from Bengal, Punjab particularly the presentday Pakistani Punjab, and the NorthWest Frontier Province presentday Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. These events further consolidated the Bombay film industrys position as the preeminent center for film production in India.

Golden age late 1940s1960s
The period from the late 1940s to the early 1960s, after Indias independence, is regarded by film historians as the Golden Age of Hindi cinema. Some of the most critically acclaimed Hindi films of all time were produced during this time. Examples include Pyaasa 1957 and Kaagaz Ke Phool 1959, directed by Guru Dutt and written by Abrar Alvi Awaara 1951 and Shree 420 1955, directed by Raj Kapoor and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, and Aan 1952, directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar. The films explored social themes, primarily dealing with workingclass life in India particularly urban life in the first two examples. Awaara presented the city as both nightmare and dream, and Pyaasa critiqued the unreality of urban life.
Mehboob Khans Mother India 1957, a remake of his earlier Aurat 1940, was the first Indian film nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film it lost by a single vote. Mother India defined conventional Hindi cinema for decades. It spawned a genre of dacoit films, in turn defined by Gunga Jumna 1961. Written and produced by Dilip Kumar, Gunga Jumna was a dacoit crime drama about two brothers on opposite sides of the law a theme which became common in Indian films during the 1970s. Some of the bestknown epic films of Hindi cinema were also produced at this time, such as K. Asifs MughaleAzam 1960. Other acclaimed mainstream Hindi filmmakers during this period included Kamal Amrohi and Vijay Bhatt.
The three most popular male Indian actors of the 1950s and 1960s were Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor, and Dev Anand, each with a unique acting style. Kapoor adopted Charlie Chaplins tramp persona Anand modeled himself on suave Hollywood stars like Gregory Peck and Cary Grant, and Kumar pioneered a form of method acting which predated Hollywood method actors such as Marlon Brando. Kumar, who was described as the ultimate method actor by Satyajit Ray, inspired future generations of Indian actors. Much like Brandos influence on Robert De Niro and Al Pacino, Kumar had a similar influence on Amitabh Bachchan, Naseeruddin Shah, Shah Rukh Khan and Nawazuddin Siddiqui. Veteran actresses such as Suraiya, Nargis, Sumitra Devi, Madhubala, Meena Kumari, Waheeda Rehman, Nutan, Sadhana, Mala Sinha and Vyjayanthimala have had their share of influence on Hindi cinema.
While commercial Hindi cinema was thriving, the 1950s also saw the emergence of a parallel cinema movement. Although the movement emphasising social realism was led by Bengali cinema, it also began gaining prominence in Hindi cinema. Early examples of parallel cinema include Dharti Ke Lal 1946, directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943, Neecha Nagar 1946 directed by Chetan Anand and written by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas, and Bimal Roys Do Bigha Zamin 1953. Their critical acclaim and the latters commercial success paved the way for Indian neorealism and the Indian New Wave synonymous with parallel cinema. Internationally acclaimed Hindi filmmakers involved in the movement included Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani, Shyam Benegal, and Vijaya Mehta.

After the socialrealist film Neecha Nagar received the Palme dOr at the inaugural 1946 Cannes Film Festival, Hindi films were frequently in competition for Cannes top prize during the 1950s and early 1960s and some won major prizes at the festival. Guru Dutt, overlooked during his lifetime, received belated international recognition during the 1980s. Film critics polled by the British magazine Sight  Sound included several of Dutts films in a 2002 list of greatest films, and Times AllTime 100 Movies lists Pyaasa as one of the greatest films of all time.
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, the industry was dominated by musical romance films with romantichero leads.

Classic Hindi cinema 1970s1980s
By 1970, Hindi cinema was thematically stagnant and dominated by musical romance films. The arrival of screenwriting duo SalimJaved Salim Khan and Javed Akhtar was a paradigm shift, revitalising the industry. They began the genre of gritty, violent, Bombay underworld crime films early in the decade with films such as Zanjeer 1973 and Deewaar 1975. SalimJaved reinterpreted the rural themes of Mehboob Khans Mother India 1957 and Dilip Kumars Gunga Jumna 1961 in a contemporary urban context, reflecting the socioeconomic and sociopolitical climate of 1970s India and channeling mass discontent, disillusionment and the unprecedented growth of slums with antiestablishment themes and those involving urban poverty, corruption and crime. Their angry young man, personified by Amitabh Bachchan, reinterpreted Dilip Kumars performance in Gunga Jumna in a contemporary urban context and anguished urban poor.
By the mid1970s, romantic confections had given way to gritty, violent crime films and action films about gangsters the Bombay underworld and bandits dacoits. SalimJaveds writing and Amitabh Bachchans acting popularised the trend with films such as Zanjeer and particularly Deewaar, a crime film inspired by Gunga Jumna which pitted a policeman against his brother, a gang leader based on reallife smuggler Haji Mastan Bachchan according to Danny Boyle, Deewaar was absolutely key to Indian cinema. In addition to Bachchan, several other actors followed by riding the crest of the trend which lasted into the early 1990s. Actresses from the era include Hema Malini, Jaya Bachchan, Raakhee, Shabana Azmi, Zeenat Aman, Parveen Babi, Rekha, Dimple Kapadia, Smita Patil, Jaya Prada and Padmini Kolhapure.

The name Bollywood was coined during the 1970s, when the conventions of commercial Hindi films were defined. Key to this was the masala film, which combines a number of genres action, comedy, romance, drama, melodrama, and musical. The masala film was pioneered early in the decade by filmmaker Nasir Hussain, and the SalimJaved screenwriting duo, pioneering the Bollywoodblockbuster format. Yaadon Ki Baarat 1973, directed by Hussain and written by SalimJaved, has been identified as the first masala film and the first quintessentially Bollywood film. SalimJaved wrote more successful masala films during the 1970s and 1980s. Masala films made Amitabh Bachchan the biggest star of the period. A landmark of the genre was Amar Akbar Anthony 1977, directed by Manmohan Desai and written by Kader Khan, and Desai continued successfully exploiting the genre.

During the 1970s and 1980s, Dharmendra emerged as the most handsome and power packed actor of the Hindi cinema and was nicknamed as the HeMan of Bollywood. His intense action films like Sholay 1975 and The Burning Train 1980 and comedy or romance genre films like Chupke Chupke 1975 and Dillagi 1978 made him one of the biggest star of that era.
Both genres masala and violentcrime films are represented by the blockbuster Sholay 1975, written by SalimJaved and starring Dharmendra and Amitabh Bachchan. It combined the dacoit film conventions of Mother India and Gunga Jumna with spaghetti Westerns, spawning the Dacoit Western also known as the curry Western which was popular during the 1970s.
Some Hindi filmmakers, such as Shyam Benegal, Mani Kaul, Kumar Shahani, Ketan Mehta, Govind Nihalani and Vijaya Mehta, continued to produce realistic parallel cinema throughout the 1970s. Although the art film bent of the Film Finance Corporation was criticised during a 1976 Committee on Public Undertakings investigation which accused the corporation of not doing enough to encourage commercial cinema, the decade saw the rise of commercial cinema with films such as Sholay 1975 which consolidated Amitabh Bachchans position as a star. The devotional classic Jai Santoshi Ma was also released that year.
By 1983, the Bombay film industry was generating an estimated annual revenue of 700 crore  7 billion, 693.14 million, equivalent to 2.12 billion 12,667 crore,  111.33 billion when adjusted for inflation. By 1986, Indias annual film output had increased from 741 films produced annually to 833 films annually, making India the worlds largest film producer. The most internationally acclaimed Hindi film of the 1980s was Mira Nairs Salaam Bombay 1988, which won the Camera dOr at the 1988 Cannes Film Festival and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.

New Hindi cinema 1990s2020s
Hindi cinema experienced another period of boxoffice decline during the late 1980s with due to concerns by audiences over increasing violence and a decline in musical quality, and a rise in video piracy. One of the turning points came with such films as Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak 1988, presenting a blend of youthfulness, family entertainment, emotional intelligence and strong melodies, all of which lured audiences back to the big screen. It brought back the template for Bollywood musical romance films which went on to define 1990s Hindi cinema.
Known since the 1990s as New Bollywood, contemporary Bollywood is linked to economic liberalization in India during the early 1990s. Early in the decade, the pendulum swung back toward familycentered romantic musicals. Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak 1988 was followed by blockbusters such as Maine Pyar Kiya 1989, Hum Aapke Hain Kaun 1994, Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge 1995, Raja Hindustani 1996, Dil To Pagal Hai 1997 and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai 1998, introducing a new generation of popular actors, including the three Khans Aamir Khan, Shah Rukh Khan, and Salman Khan, who have starred in most of the top ten highestgrossing Bollywood films. The Khans and have had successful careers since the late 1980s and early 1990s, and have dominated the Indian box office for three decades. Shah Rukh Khan was the most successful Indian actor for most of the 1990s and 2000s, and Aamir Khan has been the most successful Indian actor since the mid 2000s. Action and comedy films, starring such actors as Akshay Kumar and Govinda.
The decade marked the entrance of new performers in art and independent films, some of which were commercially successful. The most influential example was Satya 1998, directed by Ram Gopal Varma and written by Anurag Kashyap. Its critical and commercial success led to the emergence of a genre known as Mumbai noir urban films reflecting the citys social problems. This led to a resurgence of parallel cinema by the end of the decade. The films featured actors whose performances were often praised by critics.

The 2000s saw increased Bollywood recognition worldwide due to growing and prospering NRI and South Asian diaspora communities overseas. The growth of the Indian economy and a demand for quality entertainment in this era led the countrys film industry to new heights in production values, cinematography and screenwriting as well as technical advances in areas such as special effects and animation. Some of the largest production houses, among them Yash Raj Films and Dharma Productions were the producers of new modern films. Some popular films of the decade were Kaho Naa... Pyaar Hai 2000, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... 2001, Gadar Ek Prem Katha 2001, Lagaan 2001, Koi... Mil Gaya 2003, Kal Ho Naa Ho 2003, VeerZaara 2004, Rang De Basanti 2006, Lage Raho Munna Bhai 2006, Dhoom 2 2006, Krrish 2006, and Jab We Met 2007, among others, showing the rise of new movie stars.
During the 2010s, the industry saw established stars such as making bigbudget masala films like Dabangg 2010, Singham 2011, Ek Tha Tiger 2012, Son of Sardaar 2012, Rowdy Rathore 2012, Chennai Express 2013, Kick 2014 and Happy New Year 2014 with muchyounger actresses. Although the films were often not praised by critics, they were commercially successful. Some of the films starring Aamir Khan, from Taare Zameen Par 2007 and 3 Idiots 2009 to Dangal 2016 and Secret Superstar 2018, have been credited with redefining and modernising the masala film with a distinct brand of socially conscious cinema.
Most stars from the 2000s continued successful careers into the next decade, and the 2010s saw a new generation of popular actors in different films. Among new conventions, femalecentred films such as The Dirty Picture 2011, Kahaani 2012, and Queen 2014, Pink 2016, Raazi 2018, Gangubai Kathiawadi 2022 and Crew started gaining wide financial success.

Influences on Hindi cinema
Moti Gokulsing and Wimal Dissanayake identify six major influences which have shaped Indian popular cinema

The branching structures of ancient Indian epics, like the Mahabharata and Ramayana. Indian popular films often have plots which branch off into subplots.
Ancient Sanskrit drama, with its stylised nature and emphasis on spectacle in which music, dance and gesture combine to create a vibrant artistic unit with dance and mime being central to the dramatic experience. Matthew Jones of De Montfort University also identifies the Sanskrit concept of rasa, or the emotions felt by the audience as a result of the actors presentation, as crucial to Bollywood films.
Traditional folk theatre, which became popular around the 10th century with the decline of Sanskrit theater. Its regional traditions include the Jatra of Bengal, the Ramlila of Uttar Pradesh, and the Terukkuttu of Tamil Nadu.
Parsi theatre, which blended realism and fantasy, music and dance, narrative and spectacle, earthy dialogue and ingenuity of stage presentation, integrating them into a dramatic discourse of melodrama. The Parsi plays contained crude humour, melodious songs and music, sensationalism and dazzling stagecraft.
Hollywood, where musicals were popular from the 1920s to the 1950s.
Western musical television particularly MTV, which has had an increasing influence since the 1990s. Its pace, camera angles, dance sequences and music may be seen in 2000s Indian films. An early example of this approach was Mani Ratnams Bombay 1995.
Sharmistha Gooptu identifies IndoPersianIslamic culture as a major influence. During the early 20th century, Urdu was the lingua franca of popular cultural performance across northern India and established in popular performance art traditions such as nautch dancing, Urdu poetry, and Parsi theater. Urdu and related Hindi dialects were the most widely understood across northern India, and Hindustani became the standard language of early Indian talkies. Films based on Persianate adventureromances led to a popular genre of Arabian Nights cinema.
Scholars Chaudhuri Diptakirti and Rachel Dwyer and screenwriter Javed Akhtar identify Urdu literature as a major influence on Hindi cinema. Most of the screenwriters and scriptwriters of classic Hindi cinema came from Urdu literary backgrounds, from Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and Akhtar ul Iman to SalimJaved and Rahi Masoom Raza a handful came from other Indian literary traditions, such as Bengali and Hindi literature. Most of Hindi cinemas classic scriptwriters wrote primarily in Urdu, including SalimJaved, Gulzar, Rajinder Singh Bedi, Inder Raj Anand, Rahi Masoom Raza and Wajahat Mirza. Urdu poetry and the ghazal tradition strongly influenced filmi Bollywood lyrics. Javed Akhtar was also greatly influenced by Urdu novels by Pakistani author IbneSafi, such as the Jasoosi Dunya and Imran series of detective novels they inspired, for example, famous Bollywood characters such as Gabbar Singh in Sholay 1975 and Mogambo in Mr. India 1987.
Todd Stadtman identifies several foreign influences on 1970s commercial Bollywood masala films, including New Hollywood, Italian exploitation films, and Hong Kong martial arts cinema. After the success of Bruce Lee films such as Enter the Dragon in India, Deewaar 1975 and other Bollywood films incorporated fight scenes inspired by 1970s martial arts films from Hong Kong cinema until the 1990s. Bollywood action scenes emulated Hong Kong rather than Hollywood, emphasising acrobatics and stunts and combining kung fu as perceived by Indians with Indian martial arts such as pehlwani.

Influence of Hindi cinema
India
Perhaps Hindi cinemas greatest influence has been on Indias national identity, where with the rest of Indian cinema it has become part of the Indian story. In India, Bollywood is often associated with Indias national identity. According to economist and Bollywood biographer Meghnad Desai, Cinema actually has been the most vibrant medium for telling India its own story, the story of its struggle for independence, its constant struggle to achieve national integration and to emerge as a global presence.
Scholar Brigitte Schulze has written that Indian films, most notably Mehboob Khans Mother India 1957, played a key role in shaping the Republic of Indias national identity in the early years after independence from the British Raj the film conveyed a sense of Indian nationalism to urban and rural citizens alike. Bollywood has long influenced Indian society and culture as the biggest entertainment industry many of the countrys musical, dancing, wedding and fashion trends are Bollywoodinspired. Bollywood fashion trendsetters have included Madhubala in MughaleAzam 1960 and Madhuri Dixit in Hum Aapke Hain Koun.. 1994.
Hindi films have also had a sociopolitical impact on Indian society, reflecting Indian politics. In classic 1970s Bollywood films, Bombay underworld crime films written by SalimJaved and starring Amitabh Bachchan such as Zanjeer 1973 and Deewaar 1975 reflected the socioeconomic and sociopolitical realities of contemporary India. They channeled growing popular discontent and disillusionment and state failure to ensure welfare and wellbeing at a time of inflation, shortages, loss of confidence in public institutions, increasing crime and the unprecedented growth of slums. SalimJaved and Bachchans films dealt with urban poverty, corruption and organised crime they were perceived by audiences as antiestablishment, often with an angry young man protagonist presented as a vigilante or antihero whose suppressed rage voiced the anguish of the urban poor.

Overseas
Hindi films have been a significant form of soft power for India, increasing its influence and changing overseas perceptions of India. In Germany, Indian stereotypes included bullock carts, beggars, sacred cows, corrupt politicians, and catastrophes before Bollywood and the IT industry transformed global perceptions of India. According to author Roopa Swaminathan, Bollywood cinema is one of the strongest global cultural ambassadors of a new India. Its role in expanding Indias global influence is comparable to Hollywoods similar role with American influence. Monroe Township, Middlesex County, New Jersey, in the New York metropolitan area, has been profoundly impacted by Bollywood this U.S. township has displayed one of the fastest growth rates of its Indian population in the Western Hemisphere, increasing from 256 0.9 as of the 2000 Census to an estimated 5,943 13.6 as of 2017, representing a 2,221.5 a multiple of 23 numerical increase over that period, including many affluent professionals and senior citizens as well as charitable benefactors to the COVID19 relief efforts in India in official coordination with Monroe Township, as well as actors with second homes.
During the 2000s, Hindi cinema began influencing musical films in the Western world and was instrumental role in reviving the American musical film. Baz Luhrmann said that his musical film, Moulin Rouge 2001, was inspired by Bollywood musicals the film incorporated a Bollywoodstyle dance scene with a song from the film China Gate. The critical and financial success of Moulin Rouge began a renaissance of Western musical films such as Chicago, Rent, and Dreamgirls.
Indian film composer A. R. Rahman wrote the music for Andrew Lloyd Webbers Bombay Dreams, and a musical version of Hum Aapke Hain Koun was staged in Londons West End. The sports film Lagaan 2001 was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and two other Hindi films 2002s Devdas and 2006s Rang De Basanti were nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Film Not in the English Language.
Danny Boyles Slumdog Millionaire 2008, which won four Golden Globes and eight Academy Awards, was inspired by mainstream Hindi films and is considered an homage to Hindi commercial cinema. It was also inspired by Mumbaiunderworld crime films, such as Deewaar 1975, Satya 1998, Company 2002 and Black Friday 2007. Deewaar had a Hong Kong remake, The Brothers 1979, which inspired John Woos internationally acclaimed breakthrough A Better Tomorrow 1986 the latter was a template for Hong Kong action cinemas heroic bloodshed genre. Angry young man 1970s epics such as Deewaar and Amar Akbar Anthony 1977 also resemble the heroicbloodshed genre of 1980s Hong Kong action cinema.
The influence of filmi may be seen in popular music worldwide. Technopop pioneers Haruomi Hosono and Ryuichi Sakamoto of the Yellow Magic Orchestra produced a 1978 electronic album, Cochin Moon, based on an experimental fusion of electronic music and Bollywoodinspired Indian music. Truth Hurts 2002 song Addictive, produced by DJ Quik and Dr. Dre, was lifted from Lata Mangeshkars Thoda Resham Lagta Hai in Jyoti 1981. The Black Eyed Peas Grammy Award winning 2005 song Dont Phunk with My Heart was inspired by two 1970s Bollywood songs Ye Mera Dil Yaar Ka Diwana from Don 1978 and Ae Nujawan Hai Sub from Apradh 1972. Both songs were composed by Kalyanji Anandji, sung by Asha Bhosle, and featured the dancer Helen.
The Kronos Quartet rerecorded several R. D. Burman compositions sung by Asha Bhosle for their 2005 album, Youve Stolen My Heart Songs from R.D. Burmans Bollywood, which was nominated for Best Contemporary World Music Album at the 2006 Grammy Awards. Filmi music composed by A. R. Rahman who received two Academy Awards for the Slumdog Millionaire soundtrack has frequently been sampled by other musicians, including the Singaporean artist Kelly Poon, the French rap group La Caution and the American artist Ciara. Many Asian Underground artists, particularly those among the overseas Indian diaspora, have also been inspired by Bollywood music.

Genres
Hindi films are primarily musicals, and are expected to have catchy songanddance numbers woven into the script. A films success often depends on the quality of such musical numbers. A films music and song and dance portions are usually produced first and these are often released before the film itself, increasing its audience.
Indian audiences expect value for money, and a good film is generally referred to as paisa vasool, literally moneys worth. Songs, dances, love triangles, comedy and daredevil thrills are combined in a threehour show with an intermission. These are called masala films, after the Hindi word for a spice mixture. Like masalas, they are a mixture of action, comedy and romance most have heroes who can fight off villains singlehandedly. Bollywood plots have tended to be melodramatic, frequently using formulaic ingredients such as starcrossed lovers, angry parents, love triangles, family ties, sacrifice, political corruption, kidnapping, villains, kindhearted courtesans, longlost relatives and siblings, reversals of fortune and serendipity.
Parallel cinema films tended to be less popular at the box office. A large Indian diaspora in Englishspeaking countries and increased Western influence in India have nudged Bollywood films closer to Hollywood.
According to film critic Lata Khubchandani, Our earliest films ... had liberal doses of sex and kissing scenes in them. Strangely, it was after Independence the censor board came into being and so did all the strictures. Although Bollywood plots feature Westernised urbanites dating and dancing in clubs rather than prearranged marriages, traditional Indian culture continues to exist outside the industry and is an element of resistance by some to Western influences. Bollywood plays a major role, however, in Indian fashion. Studies have indicated that some people, unaware that changing fashion in Bollywood films is often influenced by globalisation, consider the clothes worn by Bollywood actors as authentically Indian.

Casts and crews
Scripts, dialogues, and lyrics
Film scripts known as dialogues in Indian English and their song lyrics are often written by different people. Earlier, scripts were usually written in an unadorned Hindustani, which would be understood by the largest possible audience. PostIndependence, Hindi films tended to use a colloquial register of Hindustani, mutually intelligible by Hindi and Urdu speakers, but the use of the latter has declined over years. Some films have used regional dialects to evoke a village setting, or archaic Urdu in medieval historical films. A number of the dominant early scriptwriters of Hindi cinema primarily wrote in Urdu SalimJaved wrote in Urdu script, which was then transcribed by an assistant into Devanagari script so Hindi readers could read them. During the 1970s, Urdu writers Krishan Chander and Ismat Chughtai said that more than seventyfive per cent of films are made in Urdu but were categorised as Hindi films by the government. Encyclopedia of Hindi Cinema noted a number of top Urdu writers for preserving the language through film. Urdu poetry has strongly influenced Hindi film songs, whose lyrics also draw from the ghazal tradition filmighazal. According to Javed Akhtar in 1996, despite the loss of Urdu in Indian society, Urdu diction dominated Hindi film dialogue and lyrics.
In her book, The Cinematic ImagiNation, Jyotika Virdi wrote about the presence and decline of Urdu in Hindi films. Virdi notes that although Urdu was widely used in classic Hindi cinema decades after partition because it was widely taught in prepartition India, its use has declined in modern Hindi cinema The extent of Urdu used in commercial Hindi cinema has not been stable ... the ultimate victory of Hindi in the official sphere has been more or less complete. This decline of Urdu is mirrored in Hindi films ... It is true that many Urdu words have survived and have become part of Hindi cinemas popular vocabulary. But that is as far as it goes. The fact is, for the most part, popular Hindi cinema has forsaken the florid Urdu that was part of its extravagance and retained a residual Urdu, affected by an aggressive state policy that promoted a Sanskritized version of Hindi as the national language.
Contemporary mainstream films also use English according to the article Bollywood Audiences Editorial, English has begun to challenge the ideological work done by Urdu. Some film scripts are first written in Latin script. Characters may shift from one language to the other to evoke a particular atmosphere for example, English in a business setting and Hindi in an informal one. The blend of Hindi and English sometimes heard in modern Hindi films, known as Hinglish, has become increasingly common.
For years before the turn of the millennium and even after, cinematic language in dialogues or lyrics would often be melodramatic, invoking God, family, mother, duty, and selfsacrifice. Song lyrics are often about love and, especially in older films, frequently used the poetic vocabulary of court Urdu, with a number of Persian loanwords. Another source for love lyrics in films such as Jhanak Jhanak Payal Baje and Lagaan is the long Hindu tradition of poetry about the loves of Krishna, Radha, and the gopis.
Music directors often prefer working with certain lyricists, and the lyricist and composer may be seen as a team. This phenomenon has been compared to the pairs of American composers and songwriters who created classic Broadway musicals.
In 2008 and before, Bollywood scripts were often handwritten because, in the industry, there is a perception that manual writing is the quickest way to create scripts.

Sound
Sound in early Bollywood films was usually not recorded on location sync sound. It was usually created or recreated in the studio, with the actors speaking their lines in the studio and sound effects added later this created synchronisation problems. Commercial Indian films are known for their lack of ambient sound, and the Arriflex 3 camera necessitated dubbing. Lagaan 2001 was filmed with sync sound, and several Bollywood films have recorded onlocation sound since then.

Female makeup artists
In 1955, the Bollywood Cine Costume MakeUp Artist  Hair Dressers Association CCMAA ruled that female makeup artists were barred from membership. The Supreme Court of India ruled in 2014 that the ban violated Indian constitutional guarantees under Article 14 right to equality, 191g freedom to work and Article 21 right to liberty. According to the court, the ban had no rationale nexus to the cause sought to be achieved and was unacceptable, impermissible and inconsistent with the constitutional rights guaranteed to Indias citizens. The court also found illegal the rule which mandated that for any artist to work in the industry, they must have lived for five years in the state where they intend to work. In 2015, it was announced that Charu Khurana was the first woman registered by the Cine Costume MakeUp Artist  Hair Dressers Association.

Song and dance
Bollywood film music is called filmi from the Hindi of films. Bollywood songs were introduced with Ardeshir Iranis Alam Ara 1931 song, De De Khuda Ke Naam pay pyaare. Bollywood songs are generally prerecorded by professional playback singers, with the actors then lip syncing the words to the song onscreen often while dancing. Although most actors are good dancers, few are also singers a notable exception was Kishore Kumar, who starred in several major films during the 1950s while having a rewarding career as a playback singer. K. L. Saigal, Suraiyya, and Noor Jehan were known as singers and actors, and some actors in the last thirty years have sung one or more songs themselves.
Songs can make and break a film, determining whether it will be a flop or a hit Few films without successful musical tracks, and even fewer without any songs and dances, succeed. Globalization has changed Bollywood music, with lyrics an increasing mix of Hindi and English. Global trends such as salsa, pop and hip hop have influenced the music heard in Bollywood films.
Playback singers are featured in the opening credits, and have fans who will see an otherwiselackluster film to hear their favourites. Notable singers are Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosle, Geeta Dutt, Shamshad Begum, Kavita Krishnamurthy, Sadhana Sargam, Alka Yagnik and Shreya Goshal female, and K. L. Saigal, Kishore Kumar, Talat Mahmood, Mukesh, Mohammed Rafi, Manna Dey, Hemant Kumar, Kumar Sanu, Udit Narayan and Sonu Nigam male. Composers of film music, known as music directors, are also wellknown. Remixing of film songs with modern rhythms is common, and producers may release remixed versions of some of their films songs with the films soundtrack albums.
Dancing in Bollywood films, especially older films, is modeled on Indian dance classical dance, dances of northIndian courtesans tawaif or folk dances. In modern films, Indian dance blends with Western dance styles as seen on MTV or in Broadway musicals Western pop and classicaldance numbers are commonly seen sidebyside in the same film. The hero or heroine often performs with a troupe of supporting dancers. Many songanddance routines in Indian films contain unrealisticallyquick shifts of location or changes of costume between verses of a song. If the hero and heroine dance and sing a duet, it is often staged in natural surroundings or architecturallygrand settings.
Songs typically comment on the action taking place in the film. A song may be worked into the plot, so a character has a reason to sing. It may externalise a characters thoughts, or presage an event in the film such as two characters falling in love. The songs are often referred to as a dream sequence, with things happening which would not normally happen in the real world. Song and dance scenes were often filmed in Kashmir but, due to political unrest in Kashmir since the end of the 1980s, they have been shot in western Europe particularly Switzerland and Austria.
Contemporary movie stars attracted popularity as dancers, including Madhuri Dixit, Hrithik Roshan, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan, Sridevi, Meenakshi Seshadri, Malaika Arora Khan, Shahid Kapoor, Katrina Kaif and Tiger Shroff. Older dancers include Helen known for her cabaret numbers, Madhubala, Vyjanthimala, Padmini, Hema Malini, Mumtaz, Cuckoo Moray, Parveen Babi , Waheeda Rahman, Meena Kumari, and Shammi Kapoor.
Film producers have been releasing soundtracks as tapes or CDs before a films release, hoping that the music will attract audiences a soundtrack is often more popular than its film. Some producers also release music videos, usually but not always with a song from the film.

Finances
Bollywood films are multimillion dollar productions, with the most expensive productions costing up to  1 billion about US20 million. The sciencefiction film Ra.One was made on a budget of  1.35 billion about 27 million, making it the most expensive Bollywood film of all time. Sets, costumes, special effects and cinematography were less than worldclass, with some notable exceptions, until the midtolate 1990s. As Western films and television are more widely distributed in India, there is increased pressure for Bollywood films to reach the same production levels particularly in action and special effects. Recent Bollywood films, like Krrish 2006, have employed international technicians such as Hong Kongbased action choreographer Tony Ching. The increasing accessibility of professional action and special effects, coupled with rising film budgets, have seen an increase in action and sciencefiction films.
Since overseas scenes are attractive at the box office, Mumbai film crews are filming in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, the United States, Europe and elsewhere. Indian producers have also obtained funding for bigbudget films shot in India, such as Lagaan and Devdas.
Funding for Bollywood films often comes from private distributors and a few large studios. Although Indian banks and financial institutions had been forbidden from lending to film studios, the ban has been lifted. Finances are not regulated some funding comes from illegitimate sources such as the Mumbai underworld, which is known to influence several prominent film personalities. Mumbai organisedcrime hitmen shot Rakesh Roshan, a film director and father of star Hrithik Roshan, in January 2000. In 2001, the Central Bureau of Investigation seized all prints of Chori Chori Chupke Chupke after the film was found to be funded by members of the Mumbai underworld.
Another problem facing Bollywood is widespread copyright infringement of its films. Often, bootleg DVD copies of movies are available before they are released in cinemas. Manufacturing of bootleg DVD, VCD, and VHS copies of the latest movie titles is an established smallscale industry in parts of south and southeast Asia. The Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry FICCI estimates that the Bollywood industry loses 100 million annually from unlicensed home videos and DVDs. In addition to the homegrown market, demand for these copies is large amongst portions of the Indian diaspora. Bootleg copies are the only way people in Pakistan can watch Bollywood movies, since the Pakistani government has banned their sale, distribution and telecast. Films are frequently broadcast without compensation by small cableTV companies in India and other parts of South Asia. Small convenience stores, run by members of the Indian diaspora in the US and the UK, regularly stock tapes and DVDs of dubious provenance consumer copying adds to the problem. The availability of illegal copies of movies on the Internet also contributes to industry losses.
Satellite TV, television and imported foreign films are making inroads into the domestic Indian entertainment market. In the past, most Bollywood films could make money now, fewer do. Most Bollywood producers make money, however, recouping their investments from many sources of revenue including the sale of ancillary rights. There are increasing returns from theatres in Western countries like the United Kingdom, Canada, and the United States, where Bollywood is slowly being noticed. As more Indians migrate to these countries, they form a growing market for upscale Indian films. In 2002, Bollywood sold 3.6 billion tickets and had a total revenue including theatre tickets, DVDs and television of 1.3 billion Hollywood films sold 2.6 billion tickets, and had a total revenue of 51 billion.

Advertising
A number of Indian artists handpainted movie billboards and posters. M. F. Husain painted film posters early in his career human labour was found to be cheaper than printing and distributing publicity material. Most of the large, ubiquitous billboards in Indias major cities are now created with computerprinted vinyl. Old handpainted posters, once considered ephemera, are collectible folk art.
Releasing film music, or music videos, before a films release may be considered a form of advertising. A popular tune is believed to help attract audiences. Bollywood publicists use the Internet as a venue for advertising. Most biggerbudget films have a websites on which audiences can view trailers, stills and information on the story, cast, and crew. Bollywood is also used to advertise other products. Product placement, used in Hollywood, is also common in Bollywood.

International filming
Bollywoods increasing use of international settings such as Switzerland, London, Paris, New York, Mexico, Brazil and Singapore does not necessarily represent the people and cultures of those locales. Contrary to these spaces and geographies being filmed as they are, they are actually Indianised by adding Bollywood actors and Hindi speaking extras to them. While immersing in Bollywood films, viewers get to see their local experiences duplicated in different locations around the world.
According to Shakuntala Rao, Media representation can depict Indias shifting relation with the world economy, but must retain its Indianness in moments of dynamic hybridity Indianness cultural identity poses a problem with Bollywoods popularity among varied diaspora audiences, but gives its domestic audience a sense of uniqueness from other immigrant groups.

Awards
The Filmfare Awards are some of the most prominent awards given to Hindi films in India. The Indian screen magazine Filmfare began the awards in 1954 recognising the best films of 1953, and they were originally known as the Clare Awards after the magazines editor. Modeled on the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences pollbased merit format, individuals may vote in separate categories. A dual voting system was developed in 1956.
The National Film Awards were also introduced in 1954. The Indian government has sponsored the awards, given by its Directorate of Film Festivals DFF, since 1973. The DFF screens Bollywood films, films from the other regional movie industries, and independentart films. The awards are made at an annual ceremony presided over by the president of India. Unlike the Filmfare Awards, which are chosen by the public and a committee of experts, the National Film Awards are decided by a government panel.
Other awards ceremonies for Hindi films in India are the Screen Awards begun in 1995 and the Stardust Awards, which began in 2003. The International Indian Film Academy Awards begun in 2000 and the Zee Cine Awards, begun in 1998, are held abroad in a different country each year.

Global markets
In addition to their popularity among the Indian diaspora from Nigeria and Senegal to Egypt and Russia, generations of nonIndians have grown up with Bollywood. Indian cinemas early contacts with other regions made inroads into the Soviet Union, the Middle East, Southeast Asia, and China. Bollywood entered the consciousness of Western audiences and producers during the late 20th century, and Western actors now seek roles in Bollywood films.

AsiaPacific
South Asia
Bollywood films are also popular in Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Nepal, where Hindustani is widely understood. Many Pakistanis understand Hindi, due to its linguistic similarity to Urdu. Although Pakistan banned the import of Bollywood films in 1965, trade in unlicensed DVDs and illegal cable broadcasts ensured their continued popularity. Exceptions to the ban were made for a few films, such as the colourised rerelease of MughaleAzam and Taj Mahal in 2006. Early in 2008, the Pakistani government permitted the import of 16 films. More easing followed in 2009 and 2010. Although it is opposed by nationalists and representatives of Pakistans small film industry, it is embraced by cinema owners who are making a profit after years of low receipts. The most popular actors in Pakistan are the three Khans of Bollywood Salman, Shah Rukh, and Aamir. The most popular actress is Madhuri Dixit at IndiaPakistan cricket matches during the 1990s, Pakistani fans chanted Madhuri dedo, Kashmir lelo Give Madhuri, take Kashmir Bollywood films in Nepal earn more than Nepali films, and Salman Khan, Akshay Kumar and Shah Rukh Khan are popular in the country.
The films are also popular in Afghanistan due to its proximity to the Indian subcontinent and their cultural similarities, particularly in music. Popular actors include Shah Rukh Khan, Ajay Devgan, Sunny Deol, Aishwarya Rai, Preity Zinta, and Madhuri Dixit. A number of Bollywood films were filmed in Afghanistan and some dealt with the country, including Dharmatma, Kabul Express, Khuda Gawah and Escape From Taliban.

Southeast Asia
Bollywood films are popular in Southeast Asia, particularly in maritime Southeast Asia. The three Khans are very popular in the Malay world, including Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore. The films are also fairly popular in Thailand.
India has cultural ties with Indonesia, and Bollywood films were introduced to the country at the end of World War II in 1945. The angry young man films of Amitabh Bachchan and SalimJaved were popular during the 1970s and 1980s before Bollywoods popularity began gradually declining in the 1980s and 1990s. It experienced an Indonesian revival with the release of Shah Rukh Khans Kuch Kuch Hota Hai 1998 in 2001, which was a bigger boxoffice success in the country than Titanic 1997. Bollywood has had a strong presence in Indonesia since then, particularly Shah Rukh Khan films such as Mohabbatein 2000, Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... 2001, Kal Ho Naa Ho, Chalte Chalte and Koi... Mil Gaya all 2003, and VeerZaara 2004.

East Asia
Some Bollywood films have been widely appreciated in China, Japan, and South Korea. Several Hindi films have been commercially successful in Japan, including Mehboob Khans Aan 1952, starring Dilip Kumar and Aziz Mirzas Raju Ban Gaya Gentleman 1992, starring Shah Rukh Khan. The latter sparked a twoyear boom in Indian films after its 1997 release, with Dil Se.. 1998 a beneficiary of the boom. The highestgrossing Hindi film in Japan is 3 Idiots 2009, starring Aamir Khan, which received a Japanese Academy Award nomination. The film was also a critical and commercial success in South Korea.
Dr. Kotnis Ki Amar Kahani, Awaara, and Do Bigha Zamin were successful in China during the 1940s and 1950s, and remain popular with their original audience. Few Indian films were commercially successful in the country during the 1970s and 1980s, among them Tahir Hussains Caravan, Noorie and Disco Dancer. Indian film stars popular in China included Raj Kapoor, Nargis, and Mithun Chakraborty. Hindi films declined significantly in popularity in China during the 1980s. Films by Aamir Khan have recently been successful, and Lagaan was the first Indian film with a nationwide Chinese release in 2011. Chinese filmmaker He Ping was impressed by Lagaan particularly its soundtrack, and hired its composer A. R. Rahman to score his Warriors of Heaven and Earth 2003.
When 3 Idiots was released in China, China was the worlds 15thlargest film market partly due to its widespread pirate DVD distribution at the time. The pirate market introduced the film to Chinese audiences, however, and it became a cult hit. According to the Douban filmreview site, 3 Idiots is Chinas 12thmostpopular film of all time only one domestic Chinese film Farewell My Concubine ranks higher, and Aamir Khan acquired a large Chinese fan base as a result. After 3 Idiots, several of Khans other films including 2007s Taare Zameen Par and 2008s Ghajini also developed cult followings. China became the worlds secondlargest film market after the United States by 2013, paving the way for Khans boxoffice success with Dhoom 3 2013, PK 2014, and Dangal 2016. The latter is the 16thhighestgrossing film in China, the fifthhighestgrossing nonEnglish language film worldwide, and the highestgrossing nonEnglish foreign film in any market. Several Khan films, including Taare Zameen Par, 3 Idiots, and Dangal, are highly rated on Douban. His next film, Secret Superstar 2017, starring Zaira Wasim, broke Dangals record for the highestgrossing opening weekend by an Indian film and cemented Khans status as a king of the Chinese box office Secret Superstar was Chinas highestgrossing foreign film of 2018 to date. Khan has become a household name in China, with his success described as a form of Indian soft power improving ChinaIndia relations despite political tensions. With Bollywood competing with Hollywood in the Chinese market, the success of Khans films has driven up the price for Chinese distributors of Indian film imports. Salman Khans Bajrangi Bhaijaan and Irrfan Khans Hindi Medium were also Chinese hits in early 2018.

Oceania
Although Bollywood is less successful on some Pacific islands such as New Guinea, it ranks second to Hollywood in Fiji with its large Indian minority, Australia and New Zealand. Australia also has a large South Asian diaspora, and Bollywood is popular amongst nonAsians in the country as well. Since 1997, the country has been a backdrop for an increasing number of Bollywood films. Indian filmmakers, attracted to Australias diverse locations and landscapes, initially used the country as a setting for songanddance scenes however, Australian locations now figure in Bollywood film plots. Hindi films shot in Australia usually incorporate Australian culture. Yash Raj Films Salaam Namaste 2005, the first Indian film shot entirely in Australia, was the most successful Bollywood film of 2005 in that country. It was followed by the boxoffice successes Heyy Babyy, 2007 Chak De India 2007, and Singh Is Kinng 2008. Prime Minister John Howard said during a visit to India after the release of Salaam Namaste that he wanted to encourage Indian filmmaking in Australia to increase tourism, and he appointed Steve Waugh as tourism ambassador to India. Australian actress Tania Zaetta, who appeared in Salaam Namaste and several other Bollywood films, was eager to expand her career in Bollywood.

Eastern Europe and Central Asia
Bollywood films are popular in the former Soviet Union Russia, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia, and have been dubbed into Russian. Indian films were more popular in the Soviet Union than Hollywood films and, sometimes, domestic Soviet films. The first Indian film released in the Soviet Union was Dharti Ke Lal 1946, directed by Khwaja Ahmad Abbas and based on the Bengal famine of 1943, in 1949. Three hundred Indian films were released in the Soviet Union after that most were Bollywood films with higher average audience figures than domestic Soviet productions. Fifty Indian films had over 20 million viewers, compared to 41 Hollywood films. Some, such as Awaara 1951 and Disco Dancer 1982, had more than 60 million viewers and established actors Raj Kapoor, Nargis, Rishi Kapoor and Mithun Chakraborty in the country.
According to diplomat Ashok Sharma, who served in the Commonwealth of Independent States,

The popularity of Bollywood in the CIS dates back to the Soviet days when the films from Hollywood and other Western cinema centers were banned in the Soviet Union. As there was no means of other cheap entertainment, the films from Bollywood provided the Soviets a cheap source of entertainment as they were supposed to be noncontroversial and nonpolitical. In addition, the Soviet Union was recovering from the onslaught of the Second World War. The films from India, which were also recovering from the disaster of partition and the struggle for freedom from colonial rule, were found to be a good source of providing hope with entertainment to the struggling masses. The aspirations and needs of the people of both countries matched to a great extent. These films were dubbed in Russian and shown in theatres throughout the Soviet Union. The films from Bollywood also strengthened family values, which was a big factor for their popularity with the government authorities in the Soviet Union.
After the collapse of the Soviet filmdistribution system, Hollywood filled the void in the Russian film market and Bollywoods market share shrank.
In Poland, Shah Rukh Khan has a large following. He was introduced to Polish audiences with the 2005 release of Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham... 2001 and his other films, including Dil Se.. 1998, Main Hoon Na 2004 and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna 2006, became hits in the country. Bollywood films are often covered in Gazeta Wyborcza, formerly Polands largest newspaper.
Squad 2021 is the first Indian film to be shot in Belarus. A majority of the film was shot at Belarusfilm studios, in Minsk.

Middle East and North Africa
Hindi films have become popular in Arab countries,
and imported Indian films are usually subtitled in Arabic when they are released. Bollywood has progressed in Israel since the early 2000s, with channels dedicated to Indian films on cable television MBC Bollywood and Zee Aflam show Hindi movies and serials.
In Egypt, Bollywood films were popular during the 1970s and 1980s. In 1987, however, they were restricted to a handful of films by the Egyptian government. Amitabh Bachchan has remained popular in the country and Indian tourists visiting Egypt are asked, Do you know Amitabh Bachchan
Bollywood movies are regularly screened in Dubai cinemas, and Bollywood is becoming popular in Turkey Barfi was the first Hindi film to have a wide theatrical release in that country. Bollywood also has viewers in Central Asia particularly Uzbekistan and Tajikistan.

South America
Bollywood films are not influential in most of South America, although its culture and dance is recognised. Due to significant South Asian diaspora communities in Suriname and Guyana, however, Hindilanguage movies are popular. In 2006, Dhoom 2 became the first Bollywood film to be shot in Rio de Janeiro. In January 2012, it was announced that UTV Motion Pictures would begin releasing films in Peru with Guzaarish.

Africa
Hindi films were originally distributed to some parts of Africa by Lebanese businessmen. In the 1950s, Hindi and Egyptian films were generally more popular than Hollywood films in East Africa. By the 1960s, East Africa was one of the largest overseas export markets for Indian films, accounting for about 2050 of global earnings for many Indian films.
Mother India 1957 continued to be screened in Nigeria decades after its release. Indian movies have influenced Hausa clothing, songs have been covered by Hausa singers, and stories have influenced Nigerian novelists. Stickers of Indian films and stars decorate taxis and buses in Nigerias Northern Region, and posters of Indian films hang on the walls of tailoring shops and mechanics garages. Unlike Europe and North America, where Indian films cater to the expatriate market, Bollywood films became popular in West Africa despite the lack of a significant Indian audience. One possible explanation is cultural similarity the wearing of turbans, animals in markets porters carrying large bundles, and traditional wedding celebrations. Within Muslim culture, Indian movies were said to show respect toward women Hollywood movies were seen as having no shame. In Indian movies, women are modestly dressed men and women rarely kiss and there is no nudity, so the films are said to have culture which Hollywood lacks. The latter dont base themselves on the problems of the people Indian films are based on socialist values and the reality of developing countries emerging from years of colonialism. Indian movies permitted a new youth culture without becoming Western. The first Indian film shot in Mauritius was Souten, starring Rajesh Khanna, in 1983.
In South Africa, film imports from India were watched by black and Indian audiences. Several Bollywood figures have travelled to Africa for films and offcamera projects. Padmashree Laloo Prasad Yadav 2005 was filmed in South Africa. Dil Jo Bhi Kahey... 2005 was also filmed almost entirely in Mauritius, which has a large ethnicIndian population.
Bollywood, however, seems to be diminishing in popularity in Africa. New Bollywood films are more sexually explicit and violent. Nigerian viewers observed that older films from the 1950s and 1960s had more culture and were less Westernised. The old days of India avidly advocating decolonization ... and Indias policy was wholly influenced by his missionary zeal to end racial domination and discrimination in the African territories were replaced. The emergence of Nollywood West Africas film industry has also contributed to the declining popularity of Bollywood films, as sexualised Indian films became more like American films.
Kishore Kumar and Amitabh Bachchan have been popular in Egypt and Somalia. In Ethiopia, Bollywood movies are shown with Hollywood productions in town square theatres such as the Cinema Ethiopia in Addis Ababa. Lesscommercial Bollywood films are also screened elsewhere in North Africa.

Western Europe and North America
The first Indian film to be released in the Western world and receive mainstream attention was Aan 1952, directed by Mehboob Khan and starring Dilip Kumar and Nimmi. It was subtitled in 17 languages and released in 28 countries, including the United Kingdom, the United States, and France. Aan received significant praise from British critics, and The Times compared it favourably to Hollywood productions. Mehboob Khans later Academy Awardnominated Mother India 1957 was a success in overseas markets, including Europe, Russia, the Eastern Bloc, French territories, and Latin America.
Many Bollywood films have been commercially successful in the United Kingdom. The most successful Indian actor at the British box office has been Shah Rukh Khan, whose popularity in British Asian communities played a key role in introducing Bollywood to the UK with films such as Darr 1993, Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge 1995, and Kuch Kuch Hota Hai 1998. Dil Se 1998 was the first Indian film to enter the UK top ten. A number of Indian films, such as Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge and Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham 2001, have been set in London.
Bollywood is also appreciated in France, Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia. Bollywood films are dubbed in German and shown regularly on the German television channel RTL II. Germany is the secondlargest European market for Indian films, after the United Kingdom. The most recognised Indian actor in Germany is Shah Rukh Khan, who has had boxoffice success in the country with films such as Don 2 2011 and Om Shanti Om 2007. He has a large German fan base, particularly in Berlin where the tabloid Die Tageszeitung compared his popularity to that of the pope.

Bollywood has experienced revenue growth in Canada and the United States, particularly in the South Asian communities of large cities such as Toronto, Chicago, and New York City. Yash Raj Films, one of Indias largest production houses and distributors, reported in September 2005 that Bollywood films in the United States earned about 100 million per year in theatre screenings, video sales and the sale of movie soundtracks Indian films earn more money in the United States than films from any other nonEnglish speaking country. Since the mid1990s, a number of Indian films have been largely or entirely shot in New York, Los Angeles, Vancouver or Toronto. Films such as The Guru 2002 and Marigold An Adventure in India 2007 attempted to popularise Bollywood for Hollywood.

Plagiarism
Pressured by rushed production schedules and small budgets, some writers and musicians in Hindi cinema have been notorious to plagiarise. Ideas, plot lines, tunes or riffs have been copied from other Indian film industries including Telugu cinema, Tamil cinema, Malayalam cinema and others or foreign films including Hollywood and other Asian films without acknowledging the source. 
Before the 1990s, plagiarism occurred with impunity. Copyright enforcement was lax in India, and few actors or directors saw an official contract. The Hindi film industry was not widely known in the Global North except in the Soviet states, who would be unaware that their material had been copied. Audiences may not have been aware of plagiarism, since many in India were unfamiliar with foreign films and music. Although copyright enforcement in India is still somewhat lenient, Bollywood and other film industries are more aware of each other and Indian audiences are more familiar with foreign films and music. Organisations such as the India EU Film Initiative seek to foster a community between filmmakers and industry professionals in India and the European Union.
A commonlyreported justification for plagiarism in Bollywood is that cautious producers want to remake popular Hollywood films in an Indian context. Although screenwriters generally produce original scripts, many are rejected due to uncertainty about whether a film will be successful. Poorlypaid screenwriters have also been criticised for a lack of creativity. Some filmmakers see plagiarism in Bollywood as an integral part of globalisation, with which Western particularly American culture is embedding itself into Indian culture. Vikram Bhatt, director of Raaz a remake of What Lies Beneath and Kasoor a remake of Jagged Edge, has spoken about the influence of American culture and Bollywoods desire to produce boxoffice hits based along the same lines Financially, I would be more secure knowing that a particular piece of work has already done well at the box office. Copying is endemic everywhere in India. Our TV shows are adaptations of American programmes. We want their films, their cars, their planes, their Diet Cokes and also their attitude. The American way of life is creeping into our culture. According to Mahesh Bhatt, If you hide the source, youre a genius. Theres no such thing as originality in the creative sphere.
Although very few cases of filmcopyright violations have been taken to court because of a slow legal process, the makers of Partner 2007 and Zinda 2005 were targeted by the owners and distributors of the original films Hitch and Oldboy. The American studio 20th Century Fox brought Mumbaibased B. R. Films to court over the latters forthcoming Banda Yeh Bindaas Hai, which Fox alleged was an illegal remake of My Cousin Vinny. B. R. Films eventually settled out of court for about 200,000, paving the way for its films release. Some studios comply with copyright law in 2008, Orion Pictures secured the rights to remake Hollywoods Wedding Crashers.

Music
The Pakistani Qawwali musician Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan had a big impact on Hindi film music, inspiring numerous Indian musicians working in Bollywood, especially during the 1990s. However, there were many instances of Indian music directors plagiarising Khans music to produce hit filmi songs. Several popular examples include Viju Shahs hit song Tu Cheez Badi Hai Mast Mast in Mohra 1994 being plagiarised from Khans popular Qawwali song Dam Mast Qalandar, Mera Piya Ghar Aya used in Yaarana 1995, and Sanoo Ek Pal Chain Na Aaye in Judaai 1997. Despite the significant number of hit Bollywood songs plagiarised from his music, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was reportedly tolerant towards the plagiarism. One of the Bollywood music directors who frequently plagiarised him, Anu Malik, claimed that he loved Khans music and was actually showing admiration by using his tunes. However, Khan was reportedly aggrieved when Malik turned his spiritual Allah Hoo, Allah Hoo into I Love You, I Love You in Auzaar 1997. Khan said he has taken my devotional song Allahu and converted it into I love you. He should at least respect my religious songs.
Bollywood soundtracks also plagiarised Guinean singer Mory Kant, particularly his 1987 album Akwaba Beach. His song, Tama, inspired two Bollywood songs Bappi Lahiris Tamma Tamma in Thanedaar 1990 and Jumma Chumma in LaxmikantPyarelals soundtrack for Hum 1991. The latter also featured Ek Doosre Se, which copied Kants Inch Allah. His song Y k y k was used as background music in the 1990 Bollywood film Agneepath, inspired the Bollywood song Tamma Tamma in Thanedaar.

See also
Lists of Hindi films
List of highestgrossing Hindi films
List of highest domestic net collection of Hindi films
Hindi film distribution circuits
Central Board of Film Certification
Noida Film City
Film City, Mumbai
Film and Television Institute of India
Sexism in Bollywood
Hindutva boycott of Hindi cinema

References
Bibliography
Gulzar Nihalani, Govind Chatterjee, Saibal 2003. Encyclopaedia of Hindi Cinema. Encyclopaedia Britannica India. ISBN 9788179910665.
Mazumdar, Ranjani 2007. Bombay Cinema An Archive of the City. University of Minnesota Press. ISBN 9781452913025.

Explanatory notes
Further reading
External links
National Geographic Magazine Welcome to Bollywood
National Institute Of Film and Fine Arts